he federal Commission on Long Term Care — created by Congress when it repealed the CLASS Act — published its recommendations a couple weeks ago. The commission had just 6 months to produce a report, along with a limited budget and staff. It’s unclear whether Congress will act on these recommendations. California also has its own vision document (PDF) on long-term care created by state officials 2 years ago.

Below is a copy of the federal Commission on Long Term Care’s recommendations, also found on the government’s Long Term Care Commission webpage:

SERVICE DELIVERY

VISION: A more responsive, integrated, person-centered, and fiscally sustainable long-term service and support (LTSS) delivery system that ensures people can access quality services in settings they choose.

Rebalancing – A Balanced Array of LTSS:
Recommendation: Promote services for persons with functional limitations in the least restrictive setting appropriate to their needs – building a system, including Medicaid, with options for people who would prefer to live in the community.

Integration:
Recommendation 1: Establish a single point of contact for LTSS on the care team.
Recommendation 2: Align incentives to improve the integration of LTSS with health care services in a person- and family-centered approach.
Recommendation 3: Use technology more effectively to mobilize and integrate community resources and to share information among providers, individuals and family caregivers across settings of care
Recommendation 4: Create livable communities building on models that can improve access to services and health care-LTSS coordination.

Uniform Assessment:
Recommendation: Completion of a simpler and more usable standard assessment mechanism across care settings (acute, post-acute, and LTSS).

Consumer Access/Assistance:
Recommendation 1: Expand the “No Wrong Door” approach to provide enhanced options counseling for individuals to navigate LTSS; and provide the support needed to make this approach effective nationally.
Recommendation 2: Provide information and assistance to consumers and family caregivers in advance of transition from one setting to the next (for example, acute care patients at admission not just at discharge).
Recommendation 3: Improve access to information technology that can improve consumer and caregiver access to information.

Quality:
Recommendation: Improve focus on quality across settings of LTSS – with particular attention to home and community-based services.

Payment Reform:
Recommendation – Advocate for new models of public payment that pay for post-acute and long-term services and supports on the basis of the service rather than the setting.

 

WORKFORCE

VISION: An LTSS system that is able to support family caregivers and attract and retain a competent, adequately-sized workforce capable of providing high quality, person- and family-centered services and supports to individuals across all LTSS settings.

Family Caregiving:
Recommendation 1: Maintain and strengthen a person- and family-centered LTSS system with both the person with cognitive or functional limitations and the family caregiver (spouse or partner, child or grandchild, parent, sibling, or other unpaid assistant) as a focus for services and supports. Include family caregivers and their needs in assessment and care planning processes.
Recommendation 2: Include family caregivers in patients’ records and as a member of the care team.
Recommendation 3: Ensure family caregivers have access to relevant information through technology.
Recommendation 4: Encourage caregiver interventions, including respite options, and integration with volunteer efforts.

Paid Workforce:
Recommendation 1: Revise scope of practice to broaden opportunities for professional and direct care workers with demonstrated competency.
Recommendation 2: Recommend that the federal government work with states to enable national criminal background checks for all members of the LTSS workforce.

Direct Care Workforce:
Recommendation 1: Create meaningful career ladders and lattices for direct care workers that result in access to career advancement opportunities and improved compensation.
Recommendation 2: Integrate direct care workers into care teams.
Recommendation 3: Recommend that the appropriate federal agency collect detailed data on the LTSS workforce.
Recommendation 4: Encourage states to improve standards and establish a certification process for home-care workers.

 

FINANCE

VISION: A sustainable balance of public and private financing for long-term services and supports (LTSS) that enables individuals with functional limitations to remain in the workforce or in appropriate care settings of their choice. One that 1) provides the tools and protections to enable Americans to comprehend and better prepare for the financial risk of needing LTSS; and 2) ensures that individuals with limited financial resources or for whom the cost of their care exceeds their financial resources have access to needed high-quality services and supports.
Alternative Approaches:
Approach A: Strengthen LTSS financing through private options for financial protection
Approach B: Strengthen LTSS financing through Social Insurance

Medicaid Improvement:
Recommendation 1: Create a demonstration project to provide workers with disability coverage for the LTSS they need to remain employed.
Recommendation 2: Assist the states to achieve greater uniformity of eligibility and benefits in State Medicaid Buy-In programs for LTSS for workers with significant disabilities.

Medicare Improvement:
Recommendation 1: Eliminate the 3-day hospital stay requirement for SNF coverage.
Recommendation 2: Reconsider the requirement for receiving home health services under Medicare that the individual be “homebound.”

Savings:
Recommendation: Allow individuals and families with significant disabilities to access the educational savings program to also assist in saving for a current or future LTSS need.

 

ADVANCING A NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON LONG-TERM SERVICES AND SUPPORTS

Recommendation 1: A subsequent national advisory committee be created to continue this work and consider the Commission’s recommendations and potential financing frameworks as a starting point for its own assessments and recommendations.

Recommendation 2: Convene the White House Conference on Aging to include LTSS.

17
SEP
Fraudulent Health Care Exchange Website Taken Down
Health Care Reform, Medicare fraudNo Comments
We’re happy to report that one of the many bogus websites popping up about the new health care insurance marketplaces was recently shut down. CaliforniaCovered.com was a bogus website posing to look like the state’s official insurance marketplace site, Covered California (www.coveredca.com). Yet, it was really just there to collect people’s personal information. We reported it to the California Department of Insurance and they shut it down.

With open enrollment to purchase health insurance in the state’s marketplace beginning on October 1st, many people are starting to research their health plan options. People who just search the web, however, may easily land on such a fake website. (Note: this open enrollment is not to be confused with Medicare’s fall Open Enrollment which is from October 15 – December 7. People with Medicare do NOT need to purchase insurance through the state marketplace; they are already considered covered.)

Unfortunately, when a new complicated law or health program is implemented, fraudsters often take advantage of people’s confusion and develop scams. Bogus websites designed to get people’s personal information, banking account and/or credit card numbers are one of the many scams we’re seeing.

If you come across any such suspicious websites, please let us know and report them to our California Senior Medicare Patrol (SMP) at 855-613-7080. Also read our articles:

Protect Yourself from Obamacare Scams
Quick Tips to Prevent Being Scammed as Health Care Reform’s Insurance Marketplaces Start this Fall
11
SEP
Upcoming Events Provide Tips & Resources for People Purchasing Plans via Covered California this Fall
Health Care Reform, Low-income help, ResourcesNo Comments
Open enrollment in Covered California begins soon – Oct 1 to be exact. While people with Medicare do NOT need to purchase anything through the health care exchange, as they are considered covered, many other Californians will have the opportunity to buy affordable health care. Over 2.7 million non-Medicare eligible Californians will be able to sign up for help with purchasing their health coverage. Also, in January 2014, an additional 1.4 million low-income adults will be newly eligible for Medi-Cal.

If you have clients who are not yet eligible for Medicare and are asking about the open enrollment this fall and help in choosing their coverage, you may be interested in joining one of the events below, A New Era of Coverage: Maximizing Participation in the ACA. The events will provide updates on:

The state’s outreach and enrollment efforts
How local organizations are reaching and educating communities of color about their coverage opportunities
Best practices for enrolling special populations, such as immigrants and Limited English Proficient communities
The California Pan Ethnic Health Network (CPEHN) and other local organizations engaged in outreach and enrollment efforts are putting on these events in 4 cities across the state.

See their registration page for more info. Below are a list of the dates and locations of the events.

Fresno – October 3, 2013
10:00 am to 2:00 pm
United Way of Fresno County
4949 E. Kings Canyon Road
Co-hosts: ACT for Women and Girls, Asian and Pacific Islanders California Action Network, California Latinas for Reproductive Justice, California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, Centro Binacional para el Desarrollo Indígena Oaxaqueño, Centro La Familia, Fresno County Democratic Party Central Committee, Fresno Interdenominational Refugee Ministries, Fresno Metro Ministry, Vision y Compromiso

Oakland – October 8, 2013
10:00 am to 2:00 pm
The California Endowment
1111 Broadway, 7th Floor
Co-hosts: ACCESS Women’s Health Justice, Asian and Pacific Islanders California Action Network, Asian Health Services, California Latinas for Reproductive Justice, Korean Community Center of the East Bay, Monument Crisis Center, Street Level Health Project, Vision y Compromiso, UC Berkeley Center for Public Health Practice, Young Invincibles


Los Angeles – October 15, 2013
10:00 am to 2:00 pm
The California Endowment
1000 North Alameda Street
Co-hosts: Asian Americans Advancing Justice – Los Angeles, Asian and Pacific Islander Obesity Prevention Alliance, Asian and Pacific Islanders California Action Network, Black Women for Wellness, California Latinas for Reproductive Justice, Community Health Councils, Korean Resource Center, Orange County Asian and Pacific Islander Community Alliance, St. John’s Well Child & Family Center, Vision y Compromiso, Young Invincibles


San Diego – October 16, 2013
10:00 am to 2:00 pm
Sherman Heights Community Center
2258 Island Avenue
Co-hosts: Asian and Pacific Islanders California Action Network, California Latinas for Reproductive Justice, Council of Community Clinics, Foundation for Change, Mid-City CAN, San Diego Black Health Associates, San Ysidro Health Center, Vision y Compromiso


03
SEP
Quick Tips to Prevent Being Scammed as Health Care Reform’s Insurance Marketplaces Start this Fall
Health Care Reform, Medicare fraudNo Comments
There are many scams to watch out for with the upcoming start of health care reform’s insurance marketplaces. And while people with Medicare do NOT need to buy insurance on in the health care exchange, scammers are counting on people being confused. Being well informed about the law and the upcoming changes is the best way to prevent being a victim of fraud. A few tips to remember include:

There is no card associated with health care reform.
There is no new Medicare card and you do not have to update any personal information.
If you have Medicare, you DO NOT need to do anything. You are considered covered. You have Medicare’s fall open enrollment period coming up (Oct 15 – Dec 7) to review your Medicare coverage and make any changes for your 2014 coverage. You do not need any coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace (Covered California in our state).
The Health Insurance Marketplace (those exchanges) doesn’t open until October 1, so you can’t buy coverage under the Affordable Care Act until then.
Don’t respond to a cold call of any kind, especially one that asks for personal information or money. And don’t trust your Caller ID; it can be spoofed to make it look like the call is coming from a government office.
Don’t let anyone rush you. The rates in the exchange have been pre-approved and won’t change during the initial enrollment period, Oct. 1 to March 31. Anyone promising a “special price” or “limited time offer” or who tells you “spots are limited” is lying to you.
Beware of bogus websites. If you are searching for your state exchange, go to healthcare.gov or coveredca.com in California. Do not do a “search,” as many fake websites will show up. Be safe and make sure you are on the correct website, and do not enter personal information in pop up windows.
Visit healthcare.gov and our health care reform section for more information on the Affordable Care Act, and see our Medicare Fraud section for more info on fraud and abuse and how to prevent it. If you come across any scams, please report them to our Senior Medicare Patrol at 855-613-7080.

27
AUG
Majority of Californians Support the Health Law
Health Care ReformNo Comments
A majority of Californians support the Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to a poll sponsored by The California Wellness Foundation. Yet close to 1/2 of voters feel it won’t affect them very much. Fifteen percent of voters claim to be very knowledgable about the law and 60% claim to be somewhat knowledgable. These figures are 4 and 7 percentage points above the figures in 2011 respectively.

While people’s increased knowledge about the ACA is good news, there are still more younger people who support the law versus elders. For instance, 63% of voters under 30 support the law and only 27% say they oppose it. Only 47% of voters 65 and older, however, support the law and 43% oppose it. This is surprising given all the benefits the ACA adds to Medicare, such as the expanded benefits and reduced costs for preventive care services and drug coverage. For example:

The ACA eliminated cost-sharing for many preventive services and added a new annual wellness visit benefit. In the first 6 months of 2013, 16.5 million people with Original Medicare received a preventive service with no cost-sharing.
The ACA is also shrinking the Part D prescription drug “donut hole.” If people enter the “donut hole,” they get a discount on brand-name prescription drugs and a subsidy on generic drugs. Since January 2013, over 6.6 million people have saved $7 billion on drug costs as a result of this provision in the Affordable Care Act, an average savings of $1,061 per beneficiary.
Despite the increased benefits this law provides for youth and elders alike, many misconceptions are encouraged by misleading information in the media. For instance:

57% of respondents predicts that the law will cause Medicare beneficiaries to lose health benefits; and
54% said they believe currently insured individuals will be forced to change their coverage.
Such findings only highlight that more accurate, unbiased education and outreach on the ACA is required.

See the Field Poll publication (PDF) for more information on this study and its results. Also see our newsletter and blog articles on health care reform, and visit Healthcare.gov for more information on the ACA.

This article was edited from a California Healthline article, 8/20/13. Also, see recent article in the Sacramento Bee, 8/20/13.

20
AUG
VA Educates Veterans about Health Care Reform
Health Care ReformNo Comments
The Department of Veterans Affairs is reaching out to Veterans through an educational campaign and a new website, www.va.gov/aca, to let Veterans know what the Affordable Care Act means for them and their families. Veterans receiving health care from the Department of Veterans Affairs will see no change in their benefits or out-of-pocket costs when portions of the Affordable Care Act take effect next year.

The VA emphasizes that:

If you are enrolled in VA health care, you don’t need to take additional steps to meet the health care law coverage standards. The health care law does not change VA health benefits or Veterans’ out-of-pocket costs.

See the Frequently Asked Questions section for more information on the Veterans benefits and the health care law.

13
AUG
CalPERS Sued Over 85% Rate Increase on Long-Term Care Insurance Policies
Long-term care insuranceNo Comments
Last week 3 law firms filed a lawsuit against the California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) on behalf of more than 125,000 long-term care policyholders for planning an 85% rate increase when CalPERS had originally told beneficiaries that the premiums for such plans would be stable.

This lawsuit comes after CalPERS’ Board of Administration unanimously approved a plan to raise long-term care insurance premiums for its hundreds of thousands of covered state workers and retirees in October 2012. Letters went out to policyholders in February 2013 notifying them of the 85% rate increase scheduled for 2015.

While CalPERS officials state they currently have enough money to pay claims, they are concerned funds will fall short in the next 10, 20, 30 years. Taxpayers do not fund its long-term care program, unlike its pension benefits program; the state pension fund is required to pay its own claims.

Policyholders are outraged about the planned premium hike. They claim that CalPERS guaranteed that rates would not increase when they bought the long-term care plans in the 1990s (see California Healthline article, 2/28).

The following details of the lawsuit are from California Healthline article, 8/7:

The suit was filed in Los Angeles Superior Court by:

Kershaw, Cutter & Rattinoff;
Shernoff Bidart Echeverria Bentley; and
Kreindler & Kreindler.
According to the lawsuit, CalPERS:

Failed to warn policyholders about the program’s financial problems; and
Admitted to taking part in an inappropriate investment strategy (CBS Los Angeles, 8/6).
The lawsuit argues that CalPERS should return all premiums paid for long-term care plans.

The firms are seeking class-action status for the suit.

CalPERS reps said they consulted with member and policyholder groups and “completed rigorous analyses of options before making this very tough decision that rate increases were necessary.” (See Sacramento Bee, 8/7).

06
AUG
Review Health Care Reform Changes for 2014 ~ Watch the YouToons!
Health Care ReformNo Comments
Many of health care reform’s major provisions become effective January 1, 2014 and enrollment in the health care marketplace for the non-Medicare population starts as early as this October. Are you ready? The Kaiser Family Foundation put together a helpful 6-minute video that walks through the basic changes in the ways Americans will get health coverage in 2014 and some of the predicted costs.

People with Medicare will not see much change, as they will continue to receive their health care through the Medicare program. They will, however, continue to enjoy expanded preventive health benefits and lower costs for their prescription drugs as the donut hole gap continues to shrink.

http://kff.org/health-reform/video/youtoons-obamacare-video/



Here is also a Spanish version of the YouToons video.

30
JUL
Celebrating Its 48th Year, Data Shows Medicare Program is Strong
Health Care Reform, Medicare basics, Prescription drugsNo Comments
A day before Medicare’s 48th birthday, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) released new information confirming a strong Medicare program. Over 6.6 million people with Medicare have saved over $7 billion on prescription drugs as a result of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). These savings average $1,061 per beneficiary in drug costs while a beneficiary is in the “donut hole” coverage gap that the law closes over time.

In addition, 16.5 million people with traditional Medicare took advantage of at least one free preventive service in the first six months of 2013.

This news also comes at a time of historically low levels of growth in Medicare spending. From 2010 to 2012, Medicare spending per beneficiary grew at 1.7% annually, more slowly than the average rate of growth in the Consumer Price Index, and substantially more slowly than the per capita rate of growth in the economy. All of this good news is a direct result of the the health care reform law.

Savings on Prescription Drugs

Because of the Affordable Care Act, beneficiaries’ out-of-pocket savings on medications continue to grow. As mentioned, over 6.6 million beneficiaries have saved over $7 billion on prescription drugs in the Medicare Part D donut hole since the law was enacted, for an average of $1,061.

People with Medicare in the donut hole now receive discounts and some coverage when they purchase prescription drugs at a pharmacy or order them through the mail, until they reach the catastrophic coverage phase. The Affordable Care Act gave those who reached the donut hole in 2010 a one-time $250 check, then began phasing in discounts and coverage for brand-name and generic prescription drugs beginning in 2011. The law will provide additional savings each year until the coverage gap is closed in 2020.

For more information on how the Affordable Care Act closes the donut hole, see our article: What’s New for Part D in 2013? Lowered Costs, New Covered Drugs, Appeal Changes.

Preventive Services

By making certain preventive services available with no cost-sharing obligations, the ACA also helps Americans take charge of their own health.  People can now better afford to work with health care professionals to prevent disease, detect problems early when treatment works best, and monitor health conditions.

In Medicare, the ACA eliminated coinsurance and the Part B deductible for recommended preventive services, including many cancer screenings and other important benefits. For example, before the law’s passage, a person with Medicare could pay as much as $160 in cost-sharing for some colorectal cancer screenings. Today, that screening is free.

In the first 6 months of 2013, 16.5 million people with traditional Medicare took advantage of at least 1 free preventive service. For more information on the additional coverage for preventive services, see our article: Heath Care Reform Brings Changes to Medicare.

For more information on the health care reform law, visit: healthcare.gov.

This article was edited from a press release from the Department of Health and Human Services.

22
JUL
New Texting Scam Involves Social Security & Direct Express Card
Medicare fraudNo Comments
We received a report from Social Security of a texting scam that involves people who have the “Direct Express” card. The beneficiary receives a text message that appears to be from Direct Express and provides the individual a number to call. When the individual dials the number, a recorded message states, “You are calling the Direct Express MasterCard verification service and due to an internal error and to avoid suspension of your card, push 1 to get verified.” The message then states that the card has been suspended and directs the listener to enter their 16-digit card number, expiration date and PIN.

People who receive Social Security payments are frequently the target of scams. Beneficiaries tend to be trustful of Social Security and other government agencies, and that trust can get them in trouble if they are not careful. Please remember that Social Security and the U.S. Treasury would not request personal information or make unsolicited calls or send text messages.

Please help spread the word on this texting scam and help our beneficiaries stay alert so they can protect themselves. If you or someone you knows encounters such a scam, please report it to our California Senior Medicare Patrol at 855-613-7080.

Remember:

Beneficiaries should not call the phone number in the text nor divulge their card information.
Direct Express Customer Service’s phone number is 1-888-741-1115 and the beneficiary should contact them if they have concerns about the security of their Direct Express card.
If a beneficiary experiences an unauthorized withdrawal/transaction on their account, they should immediately contact Direct Express Customer Service to dispute the unauthorized transaction.
The Social Security Administration cannot assist with breaches of use of the card, nor can they replace funds lost. The matter must be resolved with Direct Express Customer Service.
